# Proposal draft: “Building RNA binding protein regulatory signature dataset to identify the genetic basis of RNA splicing alterations in cancer.”
## Introduction:
RNA splicing is a complex process that is essential for the production of functional proteins. RNA splicing alterations can lead to the production of proteins that have altered functions. These changes can have a significant impact on cell growth and survival and can play a crucial role in cancer development. Dysregulation in RNA binding protein (RBP) expression or function can lead to aberrant RNA splicing which can have a significant impact on protein expression and function which leads to cancer. Understanding the genetic basis of these splicing alterations in cancer is essential for targeted therapy and precision medicine approaches.
For example, Alsafadi et al.(2020), showed that SUGP1 loss can have the same splicing signature as SF3B1 mutation in lung adenocarcinomas (LUAD). This suggests that SUGP1 and SF3B1 play overlapping roles in regulating RNA splicing in LUAD.
	The goal of this project is to build a comprehensive dataset of RBP KD (knockdown) signatures from ENCODE data and investigate their association with RNA splicing alterations in cancer with a specific focus on lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) as a model. These signatures will be used to identify cancer samples with significant matches to RBP KD signatures. This would suggest that the RBP expression is altered in that sample, thus providing a possible genetic basis for RNA splicing alterations in cancer. 
## Aim 1 [Pilot study with SUGP1 alterations in TCGA LUAD (by the end of summer)]:
SUGP1(SURP And G-Patch Domain Containing 1) is a RBP known to have similar splicing as the SF3B1(Splicing Factor 3b Subunit 1) mutation in LUAD (Alsafadi et al. Oncogene 2020). This positive control will be used to test the approach of identifying significant matches between RBP KD signatures and LUAD samples.
The goal is to build a signature based on SUGP1 KD in cell lines and query LUAD samples to identify significant matches. Additionally, the study will investigate whether these samples exhibit known SUGP1 loss or SF3B1 mutation, as described in Alsafadi et al.’s research.
We will first build the SUGP1 KD signature using Alsafadi et al.’s RNA-seq data on HEK293 cells. FASTQ files for control and SUGP1 siRNA KD in HEK293 cells(siCTRL_n1_HEK, siCTRL_n2_HEK, siSUGP1_n1_HEK, siSUGP1_n2_HEK) will be downloaded and aligned using STAR aligner. A script will be developed to identify significantly differentially spliced junctions based on MESA analysis. The mesa pairwise comparisons will be conducted between control and knockdown replicates to identify significant junctions (p<0.05 from all 4 comparisons), which will be modeled using beta distribution. LUAD samples with significant matches to the SUGP1 KD signature will be identified, and SUGP1 loss or SF3B1 mutation will be validated using reported TCGA IDs from Alsafadi et al.’s paper.

### Expected Outcomes:
The successful completion of this pilot study will validate the approach of identifying significant matches between RBP KD signatures and LUAD samples. It will provide evidence that the identified genetic basis of RNA splicing alterations in LUAD can be reliably associated with RBP dysregulation. Additionally, the results will further establish the groundwork for the subsequent broader investigation into RNA splicing alterations and genetic associations in LUAD and other cancer types.

## Aim 2 [Generate RNA binding protein KD signatures from all of ENCODE data and query all signatures against all TCGA LUAD samples to identify the possible genetic basis for RNA splicing alterations in LUAD samples(academic year)]:
This aim is focused on identifying novel associations between RBP loss and LUAD samples. We will first automate the downloading and processing of RNA-seq data from ENCODE to build signatures of RBP knockdown. This pipeline will also align data using STAR aligner and run MESA referring to the script developed in Aim 1 to generate RBP KD signature representing potential splicing alterations due to RBP loss. Then, we will integrate these signatures into a structured format suitable to query a set of KD signatures against a set of LUAD samples. Here, we will have a table representing rows as splicing junctions and columns as individual LUAD samples. Then, we will identify potential matches based on splicing junction alterations indicating the association between RBP KD and splicing changes in LUAD. 
We will implement statistical methods, including multiple testing corrections to identify statistically significant matches. We will also use the cBioPortal patient view to validate significant matches to investigate whether the RBP is mutated in the patient samples. 

### Expected Outcomes:
This aim has the potential to discover new associations between RBPs and alterations in RNA splicing within LUAD samples offering new insights. This aim also includes validation of the identified RBP loss-associated splicing alterations using cBioportal which ensures credibility and establishes a concrete link between RBP alterations and splicing changes. The comprehensive dataset will serve as a valuable resource for ongoing and future research in the related field.  

## References:
Alsafadi, S., Dayot, S., Tarin, M. et al. Genetic alterations of SUGP1mimic mutant-SF3B1 splice pattern in lung adenocarcinoma and other cancers. Oncogene 40, 85–96 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-020-01507-5
